# Heiankyo Alien Achievement Design
## Overview
Heiankyo Alien is a maze runner where you dig holes to trap an alien and once trapped, you have a limited time to fill the hole in to bury the alien alive. If another alien bumps into a trapped alien they instantly free the trapped alien. If an alien touchs the player the stage is reset and the player loses a life. Once all of the aliens in a stage have been buried the next stage begins with more and faster aliens. The Gameboy version of this Heiankyo Alien has both the *Old Game* mode based 1979 arcade and the *New Game* mode which a 1989 remake with better graphics and varied level design.
## Excel Workbook
I got experimental with this set and wrote it in Excel (this was done before I learned the way of **RATools**). I was able to apply conditions to a group of background cells by writing a small example in RALibRetro and used excel to replace the example cell address with any address on the background map. I’m using this to track how many holes have been dug and detecting various hole patterns. To reduce the number of conditions I mapped out where the open spaces are for each stage and only apply conditions on cells where it is possible to dig a hole pattern. The excel workbook got complicated as more achievements were added so I’ve included some notes below about the purpose of each sheet.
### Code Spreadsheet
The **Code** sheet contains the raw achievement code from the **Achievements** and the **Leaderboard** sheets.  The **Code** sheet is formatted in a way that you can copy the cells from here directly to the user.txt for RALibRetro.
### Text Spreadsheet
The **Text** sheet contains the text, descriptions, and point values from the **Achievements** and the **Leaderboard** sheets. The **Text** sheet is used to format the achievements in a human readable format.
### Checklist Spreadsheet
The **Checklist** sheet was used to systematically track the QA status of the achievements while developing.
### Achievements Spreadsheet
The **Achievement** sheet collects all of the achievements information in one location for sorting and filtering purposes. Since code was generated by grouping together achievements with similar functionality this sheets references code generated on later sheets and groups them here in one spot. From here the achievement information is formatted on the **Code** sheet in a way that can be copied directly into the user.txt.
### Extras Spreadsheet
The **Extras** sheet collects all of the extra achievements that didn't make the final cut. These achievements are archived here for future reference.
### Stats Spreadsheet
The **Stats** sheet is used to analyze the point distribution by both achievement type and game mode.
### Leaderboards Spreadsheet
The **Leaderboards** sheet collects all of the leaderboards information in one location for sorting and filtering purposes. This was sheet was used to test out leaderboard conditions before uploading them to the site. The conditions are defined on the **Start**, **Cancel**, and **Submit** sheets.
### Start Spreadsheet
The **Start** sheet contains the find and replace formulas to generate the leaderboard start conditions for the *Old Game* and *New Game* modes.
### Cancel Spreadsheet
The **Cancel** sheet contains the find and replace formulas to generate the leaderboard cancel conditions for the *Old Game* and *New Game* modes.
### Submit Spreadsheet
The **Submit** sheet contains the find and replace formulas to generate the leaderboard submit conditions for the *Old Game* and *New Game* modes.
### Stages Spreadsheet
The **Stages** sheet contains the find and replace formulas to generate the stage clear conditions for the *Old Game* and *New Game* modes.
### Score Spreadsheet
The **Score** sheet contains the find and replace formulas to generate the high score conditions for the *Old Game* and *New Game* modes.
### New Enemies Spreadsheet
The **New Enemies** sheet contains the find and replace formulas to generate the conditions for tracking how many aliens and super aliens were buried in the *New Game* modes.
### New Challenge Spreadsheet
The **New Challenge** sheet contains the find and replace formulas to generate the challenges of clearing a group of *New Game* mode stages without losing a live.
### New Maps Spreadsheet
The **New Maps** sheet contains calculations to figure out where the various hole patterns fit on the *New Game* stage maps. Each hole pattern is marked with a 'X' if there are empty spaces under the entire pattern.  To simplify the logic the hole patterns for each stage are concatenated into one set that can be applied to all stages.  The information on this sheet was used to optimize the hole pattern conditions so they only check areas where it is possible to find a pattern. This was not necessary for *Old Game* stages since the *Old Game* stages all have a similar pattern that can be applied to every *Old Game* stage.
### Game Hex Spreadsheet
The **Game Hex** sheet contains the one to one mapping of the memory address for each background cell.  This sheet is referenced on every hole pattern sheet to aid in the conversion from X/Y cell coordinates to a memory address.
### New Hole Count Spreadsheet
The **New Hole Count** sheet applies a set of conditions that counts the number of times a hole is dug on each background cell coloured green. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *Old Game* mode and to reset the achievement if a game over occurs.
### New 3 Row Spreadsheet
The **New 3 Row** sheet applies a set of conditions that can detect a pattern of 3 holes either horizontally or vertically. Orange cells check for a horizontal line, purple cells check for a vertical lines, and green cells check both. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *Old Game* mode.
### New 4 Slash Spreadsheet
The **New 4 Slash** sheet applies a set of conditions that can detect a pattern of 4 holes diagonally either slanted to the right or left. Orange cells check for lines slanted to the left, purple cells check for lines slanted to the right, and green cells check both.  Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *Old Game* mode.
### New 5 Row Spreadsheet
The **New 5 Row** sheet applies a set of conditions that can detect a pattern of 5 holes either horizontally or vertically. Orange cells check for a horizontal line, purple cells check for a vertical lines, and green cells check both. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *Old Game* mode.
### New 7 Row Spreadsheet
The **New 7 Row** sheet applies a set of conditions that can detect a pattern of 7 holes either horizontally or vertically. Orange cells check for a horizontal line, purple cells check for a vertical lines, and green cells check both. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *Old Game* mode.
### New 4 Square Spreadsheet
The **New 4 Square** sheet applies a set of conditions that can detect a group of 4 holes in a square pattern on each background cell coloured green. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *Old Game* mode and to reset the achievement if a game over occurs.
### New 5 Cross Spreadsheet
The **New 5 Cross** sheet applies a set of conditions that can detect a group of 5 holes in a cross pattern on each background cell coloured purple. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *Old Game* mode and to reset the achievement if a game over occurs.
### New Lantern Spreadsheet
The **New Lantern** sheet applies a set of conditions that can detect if the player is over a cell on each background cell coloured green. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *Old Game* mode and to reset the achievement if a game over occurs.
### Old Enemies Spreadsheet
The **Old Enemies** sheet contains the find and replace formulas to generate the conditions for tracking how many aliens were buried in the *Old Game* modes.
### Old Recovery Spreadsheet
The **Old Recovery** sheet contains the find and replace formulas to generate the conditions for tracking the state of each alien sprite.  If it detects that a sprite has escaped from a hole it will reset the condition until the next stage.
### Old Challenge Spreadsheet
The **Old Challenge** sheet contains the find and replace formulas to generate the challenges of clearing a group of *Old Game* mode stages without losing a live.
### Old Hole Count Spreadsheet
The **Old Hole Count** sheet applies a set of conditions that counts the number of times a hole is dug on each background cell coloured green. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *New Game* mode and to reset the achievement if a game over occurs.
### Old Corner Spreadsheet
The **Old Corner** sheet applies a set of conditions that detects if there four hole in each of the outside corners. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *New Game* mode and to reset the achievement if a game over occurs.
### Old 3 Row Spreadsheet
The **Old 3 Row** sheet applies a set of conditions that can detect a pattern of 3 holes either horizontally or vertically. Orange cells check for a horizontal line, purple cells check for a vertical lines, and green cells check both. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *New Game* mode.
### Old 5 Row Spreadsheet
The **Old 5 Row** sheet applies a set of conditions that can detect a pattern of 5 holes either horizontally or vertically. Orange cells check for a horizontal line, purple cells check for a vertical lines, and green cells check both. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *New Game* mode.
### Old 5 Cross Spreadsheet
The **Old 5 Cross** sheet applies a set of conditions that can detect a group of 5 holes in a cross pattern on each background cell coloured purple. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *New Game* mode and to reset the achievement if a game over occurs.
### Old 7 Row Spreadsheet
The **Old 7 Row** sheet applies a set of conditions that can detect a pattern of 7 holes either horizontally or vertically. Orange cells check for a horizontal line, purple cells check for a vertical lines, and green cells check both. Additional logic is concatenated to pause the achievement while on the main menu or in the *New Game* mode.
